Type queries allow us to
obtain a type from a value.
And there are two new
keywords I want to introduce,
which fit into the category
of type queries.
Those are keyof and typeof.
So first, we're going to look at keyof.
keyof allows us to obtain
all of the keys of
an interface or object type of some sort.
So here, note that we're
looking at a type alias, right?
And if we hover over Date here,
you see obviously the word interface Date.
That's an indication that we're
working with this as a type.
And we're using this keyof operator,
and then we're getting something here,
it says DatePropertyNames.
We can't really see much more about this.
Now, in JavaScript, we can have
property keys that are strings or
numbers or
rarely symbols is a separate type symbol.
So not all keys are strings.
But if we wanted to take this
thing that we have here and say,
I wanna see the keys that are only
strings, only those keys that
are also a string, we could use
the intersection type operator.
Remember, if we think
about the Venn diagram,
the intersection type operator
will help us to select only those
things that are in the overlap
portion of the Venn diagram, right?
We're saying you must be a key of date and
you also must be a string.
And if you meet condition one and
condition two,
then you're part of this new type.
If you think about geometry, and
I'm sort of revealing my
educational background here.
I'm a mechanical engineer by education.
I think of this kind of like a dot
product in that, if you remember that you
can kind of define vectors as some
portion in the x direction and
some portion in the y direction.
You're kind of getting the part of
a type that aligns with some other type,
kind of like a dot product.
That's useful enough to me that
I want all of the other sort of
visual learners to think of it that way.
So it's the sub-part of keyof Date
that is also included with string.
So here we've got the same
line that we had above.
In our second line, we're saying intersect
this with string, and look what we get.
We get all of the property names
of date that are also string.
We've got toDateString,
toLocaleTimeString,
getFullYear, 33 more, right?
It's even truncating this tooltip.
There's a lot going on here.
So remember,
we're still working with types, but
what we've created here is a union type,
right?
This is the or concept of all
of the different property names,
which could include methods or
fields that we could find on date.
We've obtained type information here.
So if we wanted to get the other
things that are left over,
apparently there's this
Symbol.toPrimitive thing.
And you can read more about that here, but
that's why this didn't
show us a list of strings.
There's actually one symbol in there and
it's for
converting a date to either a number or
a string.
And there's a footnote if you wanna
play with that, if you're curious and
wanna pull that thread.
So that's keyof.
It's gonna be really important
later in the course, keyof.
typeof, so this is a much more direct type
query in that we're literally saying,
I have a value and I wish to get
the type that describes this value.
So here's a little bit of sample code.
I've made sort of a non-trivial value here
just to sort of make things interesting.
We have a fetch which returns a promise
that resolves to a response, right?
Look at that return type, they're promise,
and then generic over response.
And then here, we've created a second
promise that resolves to a string.
Promise.all, it takes an array of things.
Any of those that are promise-ish,
it'll wait for those.
So if we await this, look at that tooltip,
it's a tuple containing a response and
a string.
But let's pretend that this
was much more complicated.
We don't have a nice
type that describes this.
So if we wanted to obtain that type,
all we'd need to do is grab this, right?
This is our value.
See the word const in the tooltip?
We're using this typeof operator,
or this keyword rather.
And then we can create a type alias
that describes what this thing is.
You may be wondering like,
where might I use this?
Well, what if you're consuming a library
that exposes some things to you,
some values?
But they don't give you the type
information for these things directly
as an interface or as a type alias that
you could independently import and export.
But if you wanted to make a function
that takes the return value of something
else or a function.
What if this were a webpack config,
a really complicated, big,
big object with lots of stuff on it?
If you wanted to make a function that
takes a webpack config as an argument,
this would be a way where you could say,
hey, look, I have this thing.
Maybe it came out of
a function as a return value.
And now I can have a type for it, and
I can use that type for something else.
It's great for
sort of threading concepts through and
making sure you're still referring
to the original source of truth.
I don't have a tuple written
in this piece of code at all.
I mean, unless you would argue
that this is a tuple, but
certainly not a tuple type.
This is a value, right?
It's the thing passed into Promise.all.
But I am very much referring
to the type information for
resolve, for fetch, for Promise.all.
That's all baked in to this Response,
string.
So if these were to ever change,
if I upgrade my typescript version, for
example, everything will
flow through very nicely.
I'm still just pointing to
one single source of truth.
I'm just sort of giving it a name so
I can hold on to it with this type query.
So typeof is also useful for
obtaining the static side of a class.
By static side,
we mean like the factory, right?
It's the ability to create
new fruit in this case and
any static methods that are on this class.
So if we look at the tooltips below here,
we haven't written the word typeof,
but we can see it appearing to us.
If we store as a variable a copy of
this Fruit class, not an instance,
we can see the type of this
variable is typeof Fruit.
And then if we create an instance,
we can see that the type is just Fruit.
So if you wanted to see the static stuff
available on a class and you wanted a type
for that, remember, if we just use Fruit
in the value position as we are here,
we're referring to the constructor,
right, the class, not an instance.
And then if we look at what its type is,
now we have a way of getting access
to it using this type query.